Hi, I'm Michael Littmann.
I'm a computer science
professor at Brown University.
And I was asked to speak
about the reward hypothesis.
The basic idea of the reward hypothesis
is illustrated in this famous saying,
give a man a fish and he'll eat for
a day, teach a man to fish and
he'll eat for a lifetime.
Give a man a taste for fish and
he'll figure out how to fish
even if the details change.
Okay, maybe it's not famous saying but
someone who isn't me retweeted it, so
that's something.
Anyway, there are three ways to think
about creating intelligent behavior.
The first, give a man a fish,
is good old-fashioned AI.
If we want a machine to be smart,
we program it with the behavior
we want it to have.
But as new problems arise,
the machine won't be able to
adapt to new circumstances.
It requires us to always be
there providing new programs.
The second, teach a man to fish,
is supervised learning.
If we want a machine to be smart,
we provide training examples, and
the machine writes its own
program to match those examples.
It learns, so as long as we have
a way to provide training examples,
our machine will be able to write its
own programs, and that's progress.
But situations change, I mean most of us
don't have the opportunity to eat fish or
to fish for our food every day.
The third, give a man a taste for
fish, that's reinforcement learning.
It's the idea that we don't have
to specify the mechanism for
achieving a goal.
We can just encode the goal and the
machine can design its own strategy for
achieving it.
I mean these days, you don't have
to catch a salmon to eat a salmon,
there's supermarkets,
there's seafood chain restaurants.
And if all else fails, gas station sushi,
so that's the high level idea.
But what about the hypothesis itself?
Now, I'm pretty sure I got
it from Rich Sutton, but
I've heard that Rich Sutton
attributes it to me.
So if I'm going to tell you about it,
I thought it would be a good idea to get
a handle on the history of the term.
Google Trends is an awesome service that
provides information about how often
a term is used historically.
So when I asked it about the reward
hypothesis, it said no dice.
Searching for reward hypothesis
reinforcement learning has 3580 results,
so that's something.
On the first few pages of results,
I found a few examples,
a blog post by Muhammad Ashraf
says all goals can be described by
the maximization of expected
cumulative rewards.
David silver used the same phrase in his
intro inreinforcement learning course, but
he spelled maximization with
an S because he's British.
Rich Sutton has a blog post called
the reward hypothesis and there,
he states it a little bit differently.
He says what we mean by goals and purposes
can be well thought of as maximization
of the expected value of the cumulative
sum of a received scalar signal, reward.
This version emphasizes that
it goes beyond goals and
the fact that reward is a scalar,
but overall,
the spirit is very much the same
as the other versions I found.
Okay, what about my version?
So I searched my archive and
I got no hits at all.
Then I saw in that same essay that Rich
said that I call it the reinforcement
learning hypothesis.
[LAUGH] So
that explains why I wasn't finding it.
With the right term in hand,
I was able to dig up this slide from
a talk that I gave in the early 2000s, and
it says intelligent behavior arises
from the actions of an individual
seeking to maximize its received reward
signals in a complex and changing world.
Again, it's pretty similar to the others.
I neglected to say cumulative and
scalar, but I did contrast
the simplicity of the idea of reward
with the complexity of the real world.
I also pointed out
the implications of this idea.
So if you buy into this hypothesis,
it suggests that there's two main branches
of research that need to be addressed.
The first is to figure out what
rewards agent should optimize, and
the second is to design
algorithms to maximize it.
People have given a lot of
attention to the first bullet,
I'm going to focus on the second.
How can we define rewards?
Well, why is that even hard?
But sometimes it's not, reinforcement
learning agent on the stock market can
probably just be given
monetary rewards to optimize.
Buying actions cost dollars,
selling actions generate dollars,
the trade-offs are easy.
There's a common currency,
[LAUGH] literally.
This picture shows a reinforcement
learning based solar panel some of my
students built.
Moving the motors to reposition itself
cost energy, and the sun shining on
the panel brings in energy so
again, there's a common currency.
But if we're designing a reinforcement
learning agent to control a thermostat,
what's the reward?
Turning on the heat or
air conditioning costs energy, but
not turning on the heat or
air conditioning causes discomfort in the
occupants, so there's no common currency.
I suppose we could translate both into
dollars, but that's not very natural.
How much are you willing to pay to move
the temperature a little closer to your
comfort zone?
Well we typically defined some
units of cost for discomfort,
but setting a precise value can be tricky.
We can express the idea
of a goal using rewards.
One way is to define a state
where the goal is achieved
as having plus one reward,
and all others are 0 reward,
that's sometimes called
the goal rewarding coding.
Another is to penalize the agent with
a -1 each step in which the goal has
not been achieved.
Once the goal is achieved,
there's no more cost,
that's the action penalty representation.
In both cases, optimal behavior is
achieved by reaching the goal so
that's good.
But they result in subtle differences in
terms of what the agent should do along
the way.
The first doesn't really encourage the
agent to get to the goal with any sense
of urgency.
And the second runs into serious problems
if there's some small probability of
getting stuck and never reaching the goal.
And both schemes can lead to big problems
for goals with really long horizons.
Imagine we want to encourage
an agent to win a Nobel Prize.
Hmm, come to think of it,
that would discourage computer science
research since there's no Nobel in CS.
But my point is that we'd
give the agent a reward for
being honored in Sweden and 0 otherwise,
that's really, really rough.
Some intermediate rewards like +0.0001 for
doing well on a science test, or
+0.001 for getting tenure,
could make a big difference for
helping to point the agent
in the right direction.
So even if we accept
the reward hypothesis,
there's still work to do to
define the right rewards.
The fish slogan provides three different
places behavior could come from,
we can use the same approach to
talking about rewards can come from.
Computer scientist love the computer
scientist love recursion.
Programming is the most common way of
defining rewards for a learning agent.
A person sits down and
does the work of translating the goals
of behavior into reward values.
That can be done once and for
all by writing a program that takes
in states and outputs rewards.
Some recent research looks
at special languages for
specifying tasks like temporal logic.
These languages might be useful as
intermediate formats that are somewhat
easy for people to write, but also
somewhat easy for machines to interpret.
Rewards can also be delivered
on the fly by a person.
Recent research focuses on how
reinforcement learning algorithms need to
change when the source
of rewards is a person.
People act differently than reward
functions, they tend to change the reward
they give in response to how
the agent is learning, for example.
Standard reinforcement
learning algorithms don't
respond well to this kind
of non-stationary reward.
We can also specify rewards by example,
that can mean an agent learning to copy
the rewards that a person gives, but a
very interesting version of this approach
is inverse reinforcement learning.
In inverse reinforcement learning,
a trainer demonstrates an example of
the desired behavior, and the learner
figures out what rewards the trainer must
have been maximizing that
makes this behavior optimal.
So whereas reinforcement learning
goes from rewards to behavior,
inverse reinforcement learning is
going from behavior to rewards.
Once identified, these rewards can
be maximized in other settings,
resulting in powerful generalization
between environments.
Rewards can also be derived indirectly
through an optimization process,
if there's some high-level behavior
we can create a score for,
an optimization approach can search for
rewards that encourage that behavior.
So returning to the Nobel Prize
example from earlier,
imagine creating multiple agents pursuing
this goal instead of a single one.
That would allow us to evaluate,
not just the result of the behavior was
the prize won, but the rewards being
used as an incentive for this behavior.
Arguably, this is how living
agents get their reward functions,
reinforcement learning agents survive
if they have good reward functions and
a good algorithm for maximizing them.
Those agents past the reward
functions along to their offspring.
More generally, this is an example of
meta reinforcement learning, learning at
the evolutionary level that creates better
ways of learning at the individual level.
Personally, I think the reward hypothesis
is very powerful and very useful for
designing state-of-the-art agents,
it's a great working hypothesis that has
helped lead us to some excellent results.
But I'd caution you not to take it too
literally, we should be open to rejecting
the hypothesis when it is
outlived its usefulness.
For one thing, they're examples of
behavior that seemed to be doing
something other than maximizing reward.
For example, it's not immediately apparent
how to capture risk-averse behavior in
this framework.
Risk-averse behavior involves choosing
actions that might not be best
on average but for example, minimize
the chance of a worst case outcome.
On the other hand, if you can
capture this kind of behavior by
intervening on the reward stream
to magnify negative outcomes,
that will shift behavior
in precisely the right way.
What about when the desired behavior isn't
to do the best thing all the time but
to do a bunch of things in some balance?
Like imagine a pure reward maximizing
music recommendation system,
it should figure out your favorite
song and then play it for
you all the time, and
that's not what we want.
Although maybe there are ways to expand
the state space so the reward for
playing a song is scaled back if
that song has been played recently.
It's kind of like the idea that an animal
gets a lot of value from drinking but
only if it's thirsty.
If it just had a drink the reward for
drinking again, right away is low.
So maybe rewards can handle these cases.
Well, another observation that I
think is worth considering is whether
pursuing existing rewards is a good
match for high-level human behavior.
There are people who single-mindedly
pursue their explicit goals, but
it's not clear that we judge such
people as being good to have around.
As moral philosophers might point out,
the goals we should be pursuing
aren't immediately evident to us.
As we age, we learn more about what
it means to make good decisions, and
generations of scholars have been working
out what it means to be a good ethical
person.
Part of this is better understanding the
impact of our actions on the environment,
and the impacts on each other, and
that's just reinforcement learning.
But part of it is articulating
a deeper sense of purpose.
Are we just identifying details of the
reward functions that are already buried
in our minds, or are we actually
creating better goals for ourselves?
I don't know, but in the meantime,
we should entertain the possibility
that maximizing rewards might just be
an excellent approximation of what
motivates intelligent agents.